The Wormhole has been closed for 20 years...

The deadly creatures that came forth from it have been
repelled - the Horde is no more...

   "This is an urgent, all frequency emergency broadcast
    message!"

   "We are under attack! Our position is sector 2-9a
    Delta..."

   "My God! They're everywhere... We can't hold them off!"

   "May Day, May Da..."

   <static>

That was the last message heard from MinCorp's flagship
carrier, the Sphinx. The haul was reported to be several
million kilos of pure Xibodnium...

***

You have been dispatched to wipe out what is hoped to be
last remnant of the Horde from the Xibodnium rich Delta
Sector. Horde nanobots were left in the Delta sector to
create fast gatherer ships. These gatherer ships, now
known only as the Swarm, were designed to pick up free
floating Xibodnium crystals, and transport them back
through the Wormhole to the Horde's base. But the Worm-
hole is gone, and the Swarm have set about reconstruct-
ing it, using Xibodnium for power! Stop them before it
is too late!

***

1. Collect Xibodnium by shooting asteroids to break them
   up and release Xibodnium crystals. Catch crystals as
   they drift by. Points accumulated for each crystal
   caught, as well as power units.

2. 25 crystals caught gives one smart bomb. 3 smart bombs
   also float free through the sector. When a smartbomb is
   detonated, all on the screen is destroyed (Swarm, ast-
   eroids, crystals).

3. Swarm ships go after free floating Xibodnium crystals,
   also. If a threat is perceived, swarm ships attack the
   threat, unless Xibodnium is in hand, at which point they
   run to the wormhole site to deposit the Xibodnium. If
   swarm collects 100 crystals, wormhole is complete, and
   opens...

4. When attacking, swarm ships come directly at threat,
   kamakazi style, hitting the threat until dead.

5. Your ship has a limited amount of power for thrusters,
   weapons and shields.

6. Shields cause EVERYTHING to bounce away, taking energy
   from shield...
